So he called up some of his buddies at Pomona and at Claremont, and he told them what he had done.
And they said, well, let's all go together.
And by that time, they knew my work.
And there was a diplomatic historian there and a Russian historian there.
And they both thought very highly of my work.
And so they said, well, we'll all go together.
I went in a body with these very fine gentlemen and it was at USC.
The meeting was at USC and I walked in and
And some were very gracious to me, and others said, what the hell are you doing here?
And so it was kind of a mixed bag.
But anyway, the result was that I participated.
I tried to be cordial to everybody.
I had learned how to be in a group of professional historians and accept the fact that I was either going to be
aloof and alone, or I would have to make the special effort to get involved.
And so I did my best to try to integrate.
And then after that, they voted to admit three women, only three women.
And they were from Whittier College.
Yes, Whittier College.
They had one woman in medieval history at USC, and they had another woman at Pomona.
So we were invited to join.
And that was the beginning of the breakthrough for all women in history.
But I think that's an interesting story to tell.
And so then I stayed at Cal State.
I did very well at Cal State.
They double-jumped me to full professor.
I won the very first Distinguished Teaching Award given in the California State University System by the California State Legislature.
And of course, our college was very honored that it came from them.
And so that was the point at which Robert, the dean of geosciences then, Earl Cook, he called and asked Robert if he could come and see him when he was going to be in Southern California, and Robert said,
I don't know what he wants, but he said, yes.
And I said, well, I think he's going to invite you to come to Texas A&M University.
He said, me?
I said, yes, I know.
I said, that's exactly what's going to happen.
And sure enough, that was it.
So he wanted Robert to come and to start a program.
in exploration, in geophysics exploration.
And Robert, by that time, was very well known as an international scientist in the field of radar and sonar and that whole area.
He had only 28 international patents and so on.
So they wanted him to start the program down here.
And so he went, and he came back.
And my husband is a very independent person.
He likes to be in charge and not answer to anybody.
That was the only thing.
He didn't want to go into administration.
He wanted to do research, and he wanted to do the kind of research that he wanted to do.
And so when Earl Cook offered him this opportunity,
The head of the department at the time was Terry Spencer.
And Terry Spencer had been a good friend of Bob's when he was, they were working together in research at California Research Institute.
So Bob was getting to the stage where he didn't want to do any of the administrative work.
And this looked like a wonderful opportunity.
They really were to get him, set up everything for him.
And he could do whatever he wanted.
And so he went down, and he came back, and he liked it a lot.
And he said, what do you think about that?
I said, oh, I don't want to go to Texas.
I don't want to leave here.
By that time, I had been double-jumped to full professor.
I was the chair of graduate studies in the social sciences.
And they were going to give me a year's sabbatical with full pay.
So it was, I mean, it just, and I wanted that year so badly because I'd been doing a lot of research and I wanted to get out another book and so I just, it was just heartbreaking for me.
But I knew how much he wanted to go.
So apparently he told Cook about the situation.
So I don't know what Cook did.
But anyway, the result was that I got a letter.
Would I please come and interview at Texas A&M in the history department?
This is 1968.
1968.
So I said, well, I'll go and see.
So I'll never forget that flight.
Davis Airlines was running at that time.
And so we took a regular scheduled flight into Houston.
Then they put us up at some seven seasons or two seasons, hotel and host.
in Houston.
It was very nice.
And Horace Byers was the dean.
I was impressed with Horace Byers.
I thought that he was my idea of what an academic ought to be.
And so we spent the night and then the next day it was raining and I had no idea what this part of Texas was like.
I thought it would be like a desert.
And we flew in on this little plane, and I sat next to the pilot in the plane and just watched everything as we flew in this tiny little plane into College Station.
And College Station was something else at that time, as you recall.
I remember...
I was not terribly impressed.
In any case, I met with the various officials here and Horace Byers and with Earl Cook.
And at that time, the College of Liberal Arts, there was no separate College of Liberal Arts.
It was liberal arts and education together.
And the head of that was, I'm trying to think of his name.
Frank Hubert.
Yes.
Okay.
So I had to interview with Frank Hubert.
And so we had a nice visit together.
And then they said, and then Milton Nance was the head of the department at the time.
And so Milton Nance, of course, interviewed me, and he took Bob and me out to dinner.
And at that time, there was no place of, well, what can I say?
There was no good restaurant in College Station or Bryan.
And so he took us out to Caldwell, to the Caldwell Inn.
Surrey Inn.
The Surrey Inn at the time.
Right, exactly.
And he said this was the best place to eat around.
And so we had dinner together, and I visited with Dr. Nance.
He was a little intimidating.
Intimidated?
Intimidating.
Yes, yes.
He was, it sounded very much like he ruled the roost.
And all your textbooks were chosen by the department.
And you even had to turn in your tests to him for scrutiny.
And his view was that if you were an historian, you could teach everything.
And so we talked about what the possibilities were.
And since I already had this great repertoire in history, I could teach anything and had taught everything.
But so we parted amicably.
I must say I was a little concerned about some of his views.
I was concerned about the whole segregation business, and I didn't appreciate some of the things they had to say on that subject.
And so I was not terribly enthusiastic about what it might be like to be here.
That's the way it was, Haskell.
And there were no women in the department, although they had a lecturer at the time, a woman, Bonnie
She was married to a person in the philosophy department.
Stadelman.
Stadelman, yeah.
Barney Stadelman.
So then they said, well, there's no way that you could possibly be appointed without being interviewed by the president of the university.
My husband, of course, had not been interviewed by the president.
I mean, this was a big thing, because if I was going to be appointed, I would be the first woman full professor appointed at this university.
So this was a big step, of course.
And I didn't think so at the time, but of course, from the perspective of this being an all-male institution, it was.
And so Horace Byers, I'll never forget what he told me, he said, you just let me handle your background.
And by that time, my book had come out, and of course it had been reviewed very well, both pro and con, but it had been reviewed in the Soviet Union, and it had been reviewed in Pravda.
And they had labeled me a bourgeois revisionist and a lackey of capitalism.
No finer review have I ever had.
I'll tell you.
It was the great publicity.
And so Horace Byer said, I'll handle it.
So he took me in to visit with President Rudder.
And this was 1968.
You know, this was the height.
And this is down in what we then called the system administration.
Yes, in the system administration building.
Right.
And so then Bob went with me.
And so President Rutter asked Robert a few things about football.
And of course, my husband, I mean, is such a football fan.
I mean, the idea of coming to an institution that might have a good football team was just the greatest
adjunct to an appointment here that you could possibly have.
So he just thought it would be wonderful.
And he'd finally have a football team, a winning football team, he thought.
And so they talked a little bit about football.
And then President Renner talked to me.
But Horace Byers first told him.
He said, now, she's an expert in Soviet-American relations.
And she's got these publications.
And she's also won distinguished teaching awards.
And he said, and she's also.
And then he proceeded to tell him about my being a bourgeois revisionist and the lack of capitalism.
That did it.
I mean, this was 1968, and that was very important.
And so Rudder, President Rudder, apparently approved.
Do you remember any questions he asked you?
No, I don't remember any.
So it was a conversation?
It was a conversation.
It was not an interview.
And he was very, very nice.
I liked the man.
And I didn't feel any sense of being talked down to in any way.
And so I went away with a good feeling about him, certainly.
And that was that.
Well then, when the offer came, and Horace Byers had said, now when you come, we'd like you to try to build up the program here.
He said, we want to expand the history department, and we want to internationalize it, make it more than just American history, et cetera.
And he said, would that be something you'd like to do?
And I said, yes, I would like to do that.
I've always liked to do
pioneering sorts of things.
But I said, there's no way you can have any graduate program in history with that library.
I said, that library is dismal.
And I had just had the job of building up the library at Cal State Fullerton, getting all the kinds of primary sources that are necessary for a graduate program and all that kind of thing.
So I said, there's just no way you can have any graduate work in history without building up the library, I said.
So that I would be very reluctant to come and not have, even for my own research, the basic kinds of materials that you could work with.
And so the result was that they asked me to make out a list of what I thought the library ought to buy.
And then there was this guide to historical literature that was out at that time.
And they said, would I go through the guide to historical literature and check the things I thought were basic for a library to have?
and that they would get them for me.
Well, this was wonderful.
I mean, I thought this was just really great that they were going to do this.
Well, the result was that they began that whole microfilm program from the National Archives.
They ordered everything that you could get on microfilm from East Europe all the way across through Asia, which was the area that I was most interested in.
And so that's how we started that whole, the building of the library at that time.
And that was a wonderful resource for our students, as it turned out.
And then I did what they suggested.
I did check everything I felt was important in the literature, that guide to historical literature, which fortunately came out that time.
Mrs. Berg was the librarian, the reference librarian.
Joe Berg.
Joe Berg, yes, Joe Berg.
And so I worked with her at the time, and she was a real pro.
I just appreciated so much her help.
in getting the things that I thought were really essential for work in both Russian history, American-Russian relations, American-East Asian relations at the time, and so on.
And she was just wonderful.
I later nominated her for that distinguished
award in library because I was so impressed with her and so appreciative of her help to a faculty member who really was interested in, committed actually, to building the library.
So anyway, that was one of the pleasures of being here.
And then, of course, there were so, I mean, when I think of the stories, there were hardly any women here.
And the few women that were here felt very much alone.
And they, so I decided that I would start a woman's consciousness raising group.
And so we began.
Was that the name of it?
Yeah.
Well, I don't know.
We just called it a women's group, but it was sort of consciousness raising.
So we'd be able to adjust and adapt and understand the situation that we were in and learn how to adjust and adapt and hopefully bring about change and not be so frustrated with our situations, et cetera.
Who were the key?
Ethel Tsutsui.
She was in science.
Then there was a woman in English who's, I think, still here, Harriet.
Harriet.
This is 30 years ago, and I'm having trouble remembering names.
Anyway, she was in English.
Then there was a woman in sociology who was still here.
She's a full professor now.
Then later on, there was a woman, Diane, who became the associate dean here.
Well, this is something I would have to look up to get all of their names.
And then they changed over time.
As new women came, they would come into the group.
And so we tried to help one another in learning the ropes about how you managed to get tenure and how you adjusted in departments where you were alone.
how you might bring about change and my own experience had been that you never do it through confrontation.
So I tried to help them to realize that in the long run I felt that you could bring about change more effectively if
if you didn't use anything that might be sort of like violence.
Did y'all move here in the summer?
Yes, we moved in the summer.
And when we first arrived, it was boiling hot.
And when we drove in and drove down Texas Avenue, you could almost see the heat rising from the asphalt and not a tree in sight.
And then we had bought this house, which was in the process of being finished, so we had a chance to design parts of it and so on.
And we came and there were these little, actually they weren't little, they were houses that were in this barren space with no trees and it just looked like the wilderness with these nice houses on it.
They were nice houses.
Just mud in the yard and mud in the back and clay, dry clay at that point.
And when it rained, it was just mud.
And our children were just distraught.
They did not like it at all.
This was in Bryan?
This was in Bryan at the time.
Your house was in Bryan?
Yes, it was on Oak Ridge Drive.
And it was, I did everything I could to try to get them involved and adjusted.
But after California, it was just, it was really the desert for them.
What was it like?
How did the department react to your company?
Well, on the surface, people seemed to be nice.
No one said anything directly to me, but I heard.
It was the kind of whisperings that you'd overhear or somebody else would tell you.
And I'm sure it was very nice for a lot of them to have this woman from the West Coast be brought in as a full professor, never having gone through the tenure process here, which I would have passed without any difficulty.
And no one.
No one ever came and said, would you like to go to lunch?
And so I just, I felt like an outcast, to tell you the truth, Haskell.
It was not very pleasant.
And then I'd heard these stories about, you know, what they thought about me.
I'm sure I was threatening.
I was threatening back at Cal State.
It's a hard thing to adjust to someone coming in from the outside and maybe making a better salary than you do, or certainly having a higher rank than you do.
And so it was not a very pleasant experience.
Do you remember any incident?
Just overhearing one of the professors say, we'll get her.
And I was very unhappy with the way I thought the department was run.
I think I've told you this story.
Where I had come from was very democratic.
It wasn't a head.
It was a chairperson.
And so at faculty meetings, even though
Women had a hard time.
There was no question about it.
When I left, I was the only woman.
When I got there, I was the only woman in the department.
The one thing that did happen when I was at Cal State, though, was I always made a great effort to be fair in everything that I did.
And the result was that they elected personnel committees so that I was elected to be the chair of the personnel department in the department and then in the college and then in the university.
And so I had really learned the art of reading applications and interviewing and
You know, there is one quality I have that I really have learned to respect, and that is I have excellent taste in people.
I just, I don't know why that is or how it is, but I've always had the knack or the ability to choose really good people, even if it's to work for me as secretary.
And I've been very, very fortunate so that I just was always able to do that.
And so I had learned about personnel.
I'd learned, you know, I'd gone through the business of having women's applications coming in and listening to all the men and hearing what they had to say.
And the remarks very often didn't have anything to do with their academic ability, but with their physical attributes, et cetera.
And I'd even gone through an experience where I had decided the only way for them to understand what they were doing was to use that same approach myself with men.
I'll never forget it, because it was with a historian who later became the head of the department at University of Hawaii, at which I had taught, incidentally.
And when I went to Hawaii, they had invited me to come to teach because they'd never had a woman, and they thought that if I came, I would help them to learn how to adjust to having a woman professor.
I'll never forget John White at the time was the head of the history department in Hawaii, and that's exactly what he said to me.
He said, we need to have some experience in knowing how to work with a woman professor in our department, so would you come?
And I said, yes, I'd be glad to do that.
But that's the way the situation was.
I mean, men were concerned about how you did it.
But in any case, I'll never forget you, Haskell.
I think I've told you this before.
Because you and Larry Hill were the only persons in a department meeting that ever spoke up and opposed a viewpoint of the department head.
And so I looked at both of you with great admiration because I thought, this is the way it ought to be.
And everybody else just sits there and they got talked to, but very rarely participated.
But you guys would get in there and you really confront Professor Nance and say what you thought.
And I thought some of the things you had to say sounded very reasonable and, dare I say it,
even, quote, liberal.
So I didn't like department meetings.
I didn't like all this business of having to have your textbook selected for you and having to report about your tests to the department head.
But I will say this, Haskell.
I never had any problem of disrespect with a student at Texas A&M.
And they might have thought it was peculiar to have a woman come into class.
And I know at times that when I first went into class, they thought probably I was a secretary.
So they wait for the professor to come in.
Or they probably think I was coming in to say that the professor is late or something of that kind.
But they gradually got used to it.
I had a little difficulty at first getting used to them.
First of all, I couldn't get used to these men coming in with blue jeans and boots and hats on and keeping their hats on through the entire class period.
And then another thing was they chewed tobacco.
And they'd come into class.
You remember those big classes we had?
And they were sort of staggered.
And I remember the first year I was there, I was here.
I'd be lecturing away, and I'd hear this kind of plop.
And then I'd wait.
And that was it.
And then I'd go on.
A little bit later I hear another plop.
Didn't know what it was.
And finally I looked up and I saw one student.
He had one of those paper Coke cups between his boots and he was spitting into it.
And that's when I realized that that wad that I saw them chewing was not gum, but that it was tobacco.
And I see occasionally, I think some of the students had teeth that were sort of yellow.
And I noticed that, and I thought, I wonder what this is all about.
And then, of course, realized that it was the chewing tobacco.
And it was very common across the campus.
So that, I mean, you just got used to seeing these students with these wads in their mouth chewing away on tobacco.
In that first year, did you encounter any inappropriate behavior by the students toward you
Never, never.
Nobody ever asked a question that was inappropriate?
Nobody ever?
I can't remember.
And I used to say that.
In fact, in 19, what was it?
I think it was 1986.
I was invited to go back to University of California at Irvine as visiting distinguished professor.
And I went back and I thought, oh, California, the standards are really high.
You hear all about how great everything is.
And, you know, maybe I'll have some really good students.
But I found that the situation was entirely different.
I mean, they might talk about we being a cow college and all that sort of thing.
But the fact was that you never had any disrespectful students.
I mean, they might have difficulty at times complaining about the reading as they always did, etc.
But never any disrespect.
There was always yes ma'am.
I couldn't get used to that at first.
Everything was yes ma'am and yes sir.
And my children learned to say yes ma'am and yes sir.
And I certainly am grateful for that.
I mean, my son still...
says yes sir and yes ma'am.
And I think that I look back at it now and I realize that you didn't have that when I went back to California.
I mean there was this kind of
Well, it wasn't, it was not a planned disrespect.
It was just, that's the way they treated everything, with a kind of casualness.
And of course, when you're very close to the beach, as they were, there was a lot of skipping classes, and there was a lot of not being properly prepared.
So that I came back and I felt like our students were better.